# TypeScript Classes

- [Class](#class)
  - [Adding Constructor to class](#adding-constructor-to-class)
  - [Declaring and initializing properties within typescript constructor](#declaring-and-initializing-properties-within-typescript-constructor)
  - [Adding a method to typescript class](#adding-a-method-to-typescript-class)
  - [Inheriting a class in typescript](#inheriting-a-class-in-typescript)
  - [Access modifiers in a typescript class](#access-modifiers-in-a-typescript-class)

## Class

A class is blueprint for declaring and creating objects.

Let’s first create a ts file named classes.ts, we will write a simple class Person with some properties.

```ts
class Person {
  firstName: string;
  lastName: string;
}
```

Here, `firstName` and `lastName` are two properties. With typescript, we can define or restrict the type of value to be assigned. In this case, `firstName` and `lastName` can only be assigned string values.

We can now instantiate this class and create as many objects as required.

```ts
const person = new Person();
person.firstName = "John";
person.lastName = "Doe";
console.log(person);
```

### Adding Constructor to class

- A method named ‘constructor’ in a typescript class runs whenever an object of a class is created.
- Parameters defined for the constructor method, must be supplied at the time of instantiation.

```ts
class Person {
  firstName: string;
  lastName: string;
  age: number;

  constructor(fName: string, lName: string, age: number) {
    this.firstName = fName;
    this.lastName = lName;
    this.age = age;
  }
}
```

In this case, the constructor takes `fName`, `lName` and `age` as parameters and initialize relevant properties.

```ts
const person = new Person("John", "Doe", 22);
console.log(person);
```

### Declaring and initializing properties within typescript constructor:

While above class looks more readable, there is a shorthand to declare and initialize the class properties

```ts
class Person {
  constructor(
    public firstName: string,
    public lastName: string,
    public age: number
  ) {}
}
```

note, we now have an empty constructor body but it still do the job of assigning values to the class properties.

### Adding a method to typescript class:

A function inside a class is called its method. In `Person` class, we might want to add a method which concatenates first name and last name and returns full name.

```ts
class Person {
  constructor(
    public firstName: string,
    public lastName: string,
    public age: number
  ) {}

  fullName(): string {
    return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
  }
}
const person = new Person("John", "Doe", 22);
console.log(person.fullName());
```

Compiling and running the script now should log ‘John Doe’ to the console.

### Inheriting a class in typescript

In a real world application, `Person` class will have varying implementations. An e-commerce application can have customer, admins, developers and many other entities relatable to `Person`. All these entities have some attributes like name, email and some methods like `fullName` in common. To deal with such a scenario, it is good practice to have a (kind of) abstract class which contains common attributes and behaviors.

For distinguished attributes and behaviors, we should define classes which extends the parent class and consist of the specific properties which are only relevant to this class. Let’s see how we create child classes in typescript or inherit a parent class.

```ts
class Person {
  constructor(
    public firstName: string,
    public lastName: string,
    public age: number
  ) {}

  fullName(): string {
    return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
  }
}

class Customer extends Person {
  constructor(
    public firstName: string,
    public lastName: string,
    public age: number,
    public orderIds: number[] = []
  ) {
    super(firstName, firstName, age);
  }

  addOrderId(orderId: number): true | false {
    this.orderIds.push(orderId);
    return true;
  }
}
```

The child class must call `super()` in its constructor to supply parameters to the parent class.

The customer class have a new property .i.e. `orderIds`. As `orderIds` array is only suitable for a customer entity, we have isolated it from a `Person` class.

In the `Customer` class, the property `orderIds` is being declared using constructor shorthand. By default, orderIds should be an empty array as declared by public `orderIds: number[] = []`

Since `orderIds` is only relevant to customer class, we need to have some methods in customer class to add and delete customer orders.

```ts
    addOrderId(orderId: number): true | false {
        this.orderIds.push(orderId);
        return true;
    }

}
```

`addOrderId` is a customer class method, it takes an order id and push it to the `orderIds` property. : `true | false` part of the method definition is making sure that either a boolean true or false is returned.

Let’s see how we can create an object of customer class and add orders to it:

```ts
const customer = new Customer("John", "Doe", 33);
customer.addOrderId(1245);
customer.addOrderId(1235);
console.log(customer);
```

Running the code now should log something as following to the console:
`Customer { firstName: 'John', lastName: 'Doe', age: 33, orderIds: [ 1245, 1235 ] }`

### Access modifiers in a typescript class:

In typescript, access modifiers are checked at compile time and not at runtime. following access modifiers can be used with class properties or methods:

**Private** access modifier ensures that the property or the method can only be used within the same class. Any attempt on accessing the private property or method from outside of the class and even in subclass will result in an error at compile stage.

**Protected** properties and methods can be accessed from the same class and also from the classes inheriting from this class.

**Public** access modifier, as the name suggests, can be accessed from class,subclass and outside of the class. By default, all the properties and methods of a class are public.
